ENGR36035D
Introduction to Energy Systems	Sheridan
 
  I: Administrative Information   II: Course Details   III: Topical Outline(s)  Printable Version
 

Land Acknowledgement
First Nations peoples have lived on this part of Turtle Island for millennia, stewarding the land, the water and all that contributes to life in this region. Today, the culture and presence of First Nations, Inuit and Metis peoples enrich the lands and people of this territory.

Over two centuries ago, the Mississauga people welcomed settlers to this territory, providing sustenance and engaging in trade and commerce. Between 1781 to 1820, eight treaties were signed with the Mississaugas of the Credit First Nation who opened their territory to settlement. Today, Sheridan campuses are located on Treaty 14, also known as the Head of the Lake Purchase of 1806 and Treaty 22 and 23 of 1820.

Treaty history is foundational, and it is our collective responsibility to honour the land, as we honour and respect those who have gone before us, those who are here and those who have yet to come. We are grateful for the opportunity to be learning, working and thriving on this land, and we commit to learn the truth and be active in the process of reconciliation.


Section I: Administrative Information
 	Total hours: 70.0
Credit Value: 4.0
Credit Value Notes: N/A
Effective: Fall 2026
Prerequisites: PHYS15924D
Corequisites: N/A
Equivalents: N/A
Pre/Co/Equiv Notes: N/A
Program(s): Bachelor of Engineering (Elec), Bachelor of Engineering (Mech)
Program Coordinator(s): Andy Alubaidy, Hooman Nabovati Khormazard
Course Leader or Contact: Amin Ghobeity
Version: 20260908_00
Status: Approved (APPR)

Section I Notes: The passing grade in this course is 60%. Accreditation Units: Natural Science 25%, Complementary Studies 25%, Engineering Science 25%, Engineering Design 25%.

 
 
Section II: Course Details
Detailed Description

Students learn about the traditional and renewable energy sources as well as systems and concepts to convert various energy sources to mechanical and electrical energy. Students develop simulation models to complete thermo-economics analyses and study the associated socio-environmental impacts of energy systems. Students are introduced to renewable energy sources and the efficient utilization of renewable energy systems. Through laboratory experiments, project work, case studies, and independent assignments, students apply their theoretical knowledge to analyze various energy systems.

Program Context

 	
Bachelor of Engineering (Elec)	Program Coordinator(s): Hooman Nabovati Khormazard
This is a required intermediate engineering science course that builds on foundational knowledge of energy concepts and prepares students for subsequent courses in the design and analysis of advanced energy systems.

Bachelor of Engineering (Mech)	Program Coordinator(s): Andy Alubaidy
This is a required intermediate engineering science course that builds on foundational knowledge of energy concepts and prepares students for subsequent courses in the design and analysis of advanced energy systems.


Course Critical Performance and Learning Outcomes

 	Critical Performance:
By the end of this course students will have demonstrated the ability to analyze various energy systems, at both the conceptual level and system level, for efficiency, economics, and the environmental impacts of various traditional and renewable energy systems.
 	
Learning Outcomes:

To achieve the critical performance, students will have demonstrated the ability to:

Interpret the environmental impact of current energy technologies (IE.1).
Analyze the environmental impact of energy systems including the modeling of anthropomorphic climate change (KB.2, KB.4, IE.1).
Develop energy system diagrams highlighting the main components of energy conversion systems (CS.1, CS.2).
Estimate heating value, emission and the future availability of non-renewable energy resources (KB.4, IE.1, IN.3).
Describe the operating principles of conventional power plants (KB. 4).
Explain the thermodynamic cycles and working principles of various combustion cycle (KB.4, IN.3).
Analyze conventional power plant thermodynamic cycles (PA.3, KB.4).
Describe the operating principles of non-conventional energy conversion technologies such as solar, wind, nuclear and fuel cell technologies (KB.2, KB.4).
Analyze the resource requirements of non-conventional energy technologies (KB.4, PA.2, PA.3, ET.2).
Develop system-level analytical models for energy systems (PA.3).
Develop computer simulation models for simplified energy systems .
Design a conceptual energy system to meet a specified thermal energy and electricity demand (ET.2, ET.3, DE.1, DE.2, DE.3, DE.4).

Evaluation Plan
Students demonstrate their learning in the following ways:

 	Evaluation Plan: IN-CLASS
 	Laboratory Reports (3@ 5%)	15.0%
 	Assignments (3 @ 5%)	15.0%
 	Midterm Exam	25.0%
 	BUS Project/Project (Report and Presentation)	15.0%
 	Final Exam	30.0%
Total	100.0%

Evaluation Notes and Academic Missed Work Procedure:
Evaluations in this course may include BUS projects for which the evaluation is distributed across two or more parallel courses. Only elements of evaluation to be attributed to this course are shown here. 

(The School of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering & Technology is abbreviated as MEET in this outline.)

MEET MISSED EVALUATIONS PROCESS:
Please refer to the supporting documents posted in the Student Success in Engineering Virtual Community on SLATE.

MEET LATE ASSIGNMENT POLICY:
Assignments and Lab Reports are due as advised by the instructor.  Late submission will attract a 10% deduction per day, to a maximum of 30%.  Assignments submitted after 3 days late will be awarded a grade of zero.

Provincial Context
The course meets the following Ministry of Colleges and Universities requirements:

 	
Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition
PLAR Contact (if course is PLAR-eligible) - Office of the Registrar

Not Eligible for PLAR
 
 
Section III: Topical Outline
Some details of this outline may change as a result of circumstances such as weather cancellations, College and student activities, and class timetabling.
Instruction Mode: In-Class
Professor: Multiple Professors
Resource(s):
Course material costs can be found through the Sheridan Bookstore
 	Type	Description
Required	Textbook	Energy Systems Engineering: Evaluation and Implementation, Vanek, F., Albright, L., Angenent, L., McGraw-Hill Education, 3rd Edition, ISBN 9781259585098, 2016
Optional	Textbook	Energy, Environment, and Sustainability, Moaveni, S., Nelson (Cengage Learning), 001 Edition, ISBN 9781133105091, 2017
Optional	Textbook	Energy Systems Design and Operation: A Unified Method, Tostevin, G.M., McGraw-Hill Professional, 1st Edition, ISBN 978-0071772914, 2012

Applicable student group(s): Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical Engineering) Bachelor of Engineering (Electrical Engineering)
Course Details:
Module 1: Introduction to Energy Issues
- Energy classification and terminology
- Conventional energy sources
- Efficiencies of conventional energy conversion systems
- Worldwide energy supply and demand; a historical perspective
- Environmental impact of energy systems
- Quantitative relationship between CO2 emission and energy systems
- Carbon cycle and global warming
Learning Outcomes: 1, 2
 
Module 2: Fuel in Energy Systems
- Origins of fuels
- Classifications of fuels
- Physical and chemical properties of fuels
- Non-conventional fuels
Learning Outcomes: 3, 4
Assignment 1 (5%)
Laboratory Report 1 (5%)
 
Module 3: Combustion Cycles of Power Plants
- Steam turbine power plants
- Gas power plants
- Conventional steam cycles, including Rankine, reheat, and regenerative cycles
- Conventional gas cycles, including Brayton cycle
- Combined cycles
- Cogeneration of heat and power
Learning Outcomes: 5, 6, 7
 
Midterm Exam (25%)
 
Module 4: Climate Change Issues
- Greenhouse effects and greenhouse gas emissions
- Carbon cycle, global warming and modeling of anthropomorphic climate change
- Link between energy systems and climate change
- Characterization of climate change
Learning Outcomes: 1, 2
Assignment 2 (5%)
Laboratory Report 2 (5%)
 
Module 5: Introduction to Alternative Energy Sources
- Solar photovoltaics
- Solar-thermal system
- Wind turbines
- Geothermal systems
- Nuclear power plants
- Biomass
- Fuel cells
- Ocean energy
Learning Outcomes: 8, 9, 10
Assignment 3 (5%)
Laboratory Report 3 (5%)
 
Module 6: Modeling and Simulation of Energy Systems
- Integrated system modeling and simulation of energy systems
- Life-cycle analysis and return on investment of energy systems
- Monte-Carlo simulation of energy systems
- BUS Project/Project Report and Presentation (15%)
Learning Outcomes: 10, 11
 
Final Exam (30%)


Sheridan Policies
It is recommended that students read the following policies in relation to course outlines:


Academic Integrity
Copyright
Intellectual Property
Respectful Behaviour
Accessible Learning
All Sheridan policies can be viewed on the Sheridan policy website.

Appropriate use of generative Artificial Intelligence tools: In alignment with Sheridan's Academic Integrity Policy, students should consult with their professors and/or refer to evaluation instructions regarding the appropriate use, or prohibition, of generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools for coursework. Turnitin AI detection software may be used by faculty members to screen assignment submissions or exams for unauthorized use of artificial intelligence. Students are encouraged to engage with generative AI in teaching and learning contexts thoughtfully. Please review the Guidelines for the Responsible Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence at Sheridan College.

Course Outline Changes: The information contained in this Course Outline including but not limited to faculty and program information and course description is subject to change without notice. Any changes to course curriculum and/or assessment shall adhere to approved Sheridan protocol. Nothing in this Course Outline should be viewed as a representation, offer and/or warranty. Students are responsible for reading the Important Notice and Disclaimer which applies to Programs and Courses.


[ Printable Version ]

Copyright © Sheridan College. All rights reserved.
