ANTH17028GD
Anthropology of Health	Sheridan
 
  I: Administrative Information   II: Course Details   III: Topical Outline(s)  Printable Version
 

Land Acknowledgement
First Nations peoples have lived on this part of Turtle Island for millennia, stewarding the land, the water and all that contributes to life in this region. Today, the culture and presence of First Nations, Inuit and Metis peoples enrich the lands and people of this territory.

Over two centuries ago, the Mississauga people welcomed settlers to this territory, providing sustenance and engaging in trade and commerce. Between 1781 to 1820, eight treaties were signed with the Mississaugas of the Credit First Nation who opened their territory to settlement. Today, Sheridan campuses are located on Treaty 14, also known as the Head of the Lake Purchase of 1806 and Treaty 22 and 23 of 1820.

Treaty history is foundational, and it is our collective responsibility to honour the land, as we honour and respect those who have gone before us, those who are here and those who have yet to come. We are grateful for the opportunity to be learning, working and thriving on this land, and we commit to learn the truth and be active in the process of reconciliation.


Section I: Administrative Information
 	Total hours: 42.0
Credit Value: 3.0
Credit Value Notes: N/A
Effective: Winter 2026
Prerequisites: N/A
Corequisites: N/A
Equivalents: N/A
Pre/Co/Equiv Notes: N/A
Program(s): Degree Breadth
Program Coordinator(s): Alexander Hollenberg
Course Leader or Contact: Jaime Ginter
Version: 20260105_00
Status: Approved (APPR)

Section I Notes: Section I Notes: This is a web-based course taught fully online, using Desire2Learn Learning Management System. To take this course, students will need reliable access to the Internet. They should have a basic level of comfort using computers as well as self-discipline to work online. All faculty members must be TCPS2 certified prior to teaching this course. This course has received Course-Based Sheridan Research Ethics Board approval (SREB No 2020-12-002-039).

 
 
Section II: Course Details
Detailed Description

Students investigate biocultural approaches to the study of prehistoric, historic and contemporary health and disease patterns in order to understand the impact of evolution, culture change, and globalization on human health. Students examine the determinants of human health in the past and present from the perspectives of biological and medical anthropology. In this innovative interdisciplinary course, students develop an understanding of the factors that are responsible for health and disease by engaging in interactive lectures, learning activities, discussions, case studies and open-source health data. Evidence-based research and experiential learning opportunities challenge students to think critically about health issues that are affecting human populations, shared determinants, as well as differential factors that produce health outcomes.

Program Context

 	
Degree Breadth	Program Coordinator(s): Alexander Hollenberg
This is an introductory (1000-level) Baccalaureate elective in the Social Science field of study for students in Degree programs. Electives make students aware of the distinctive assumptions and modes of analysis of at least one discipline outside their main field of study and of the society and culture in which they live and work


Course Critical Performance and Learning Outcomes

 	Critical Performance:
By the end of this course students will have demonstrated the ability to critique the impact of biology, culture, and the environment on human health in the past and present.
 	
Learning Outcomes:

To achieve the critical performance, students will have demonstrated the ability to:

Apply different theoretical and methodological approaches used by biological and medical anthropologists in the study of human health.
Discuss how human health has changed through time.
Evaluate biocultural perspectives on human health.
Explain how the determinants of health affect the health of individuals and communities.
Appraise evolutionary perspectives on human health.
Assess health status through the analysis of human skeletal remains.
Investigate human health through the collection and analysis of primary and secondary data.

Evaluation Plan
Students demonstrate their learning in the following ways:

 	Evaluation Plan: ONLINE
 	Discussion	20.0%
 	Quizzes (10 @ 5%)	50.0%
 	Paleopathology Project Prep	5.0%
 	Paleopathology Group Contract	5.0%
 	Paleopathology Group Project	20.0%
Total	100.0%

Evaluation Notes and Academic Missed Work Procedure:
TEST AND ASSIGNMENT PROTOCOL
 
To encourage behaviours that will help students to be successful in the workplace and to ensure that students receive credit for their individual work, the following rules apply to every course offered within the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences.
 
1.  Students are responsible for staying abreast of test dates and times, as well as due dates and any special instructions for submitting assignments and projects as supplied to the class by the professor.

2.  Students must write all tests at the specified times. Missed tests, in-class activities, assignments and presentations are awarded a mark of zero.  If an extension or make-up opportunity is approved by the professor as outlined below, the mark of zero may be revised by subsequent performance.  The penalty for late submission of written assignments is a loss of 10% per day for up to five business days (excluding weekends and statutory holidays), after which, a grade of zero is assigned. Business days include any day that the college is open for business, whether the student has scheduled classes that day or not.

3.  Students, who miss a test or in-class activity or assignment or fail to submit an assignment on time due to exceptional circumstances, are required to notify their professor in advance of the class whenever possible.  A make-up test may be supplied for students who provide an acceptable explanation of their absence and/or acceptable documentation explaining their absence (e.g., a medical certificate). All make-up tests are to be written at a time and place specified by the professor upon the student's return. Alternately, students may be given an opportunity to earn the associated marks by having a subsequent test count for the additional marks. Exceptional circumstances may result in a modification of due dates for assignments.

4.  Unless otherwise specified, assignments and projects must be submitted at the beginning of class.

5.  Students must complete every assignment as an individual effort unless, the professor specifies otherwise.

6.  Inappropriate use of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Technology (as defined in the Academic Integrity Policy) is not permitted in any course in FHASS. Faculty may provide explicit guidelines on the use of Generative AI, digital technology, and machine writing tools in all courses within FHASS. Where no course-specific guidelines are provided, any use of Generative AI is strictly prohibited. Students are responsible for understanding expectations for every evaluation. 

7.  Since there may be instances of grade appeal or questions regarding the timely completion of assignments and/or extent of individual effort, etc., students are strongly advised to keep, and make available to their professor, if requested, a copy of all assignments and working notes until the course grade has been finalized.

8.  There will be no resubmission of work unless this has been previously agreed to or suggested by the professor.

9.  Students must submit all assignments in courses with practical lab and field components in order to pass the course.

Provincial Context
The course meets the following Ministry of Colleges and Universities requirements:

 	
Degree Breadth
This Degree Breadth course relates to the following field of study as specified by the Ministry of Colleges and Universities.

Level 1000, Social Sciences
Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition
PLAR Contact (if course is PLAR-eligible) - Office of the Registrar
Students may apply to receive credit by demonstrating achievement of the course learning outcomes through previous relevant work/life experience, service, self-study and training on the job. This course is eligible for challenge through the following method(s):

Challenge Exam
Notes:  Both a challenge exam and a portfolio are required to receive credit
Interview
Notes:  Both a challenge exam and a portfolio are required to receive credit
 
 
Section III: Topical Outline
Some details of this outline may change as a result of circumstances such as weather cancellations, College and student activities, and class timetabling.
Instruction Mode: Online
Professor: Jaime Ginter
Resource(s):
Course material costs can be found through the Sheridan Bookstore
 	Type	Description
Required	Other	Anthropology of Health is offered as a green course. In lieu of a physical textbook, selected readings are provided as hyperlinks and e-documents in the SLATE course content.
Optional	Other	Recommended Readings: Aufderheide AC, Rodriguez-Martin C. 1998. The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Paleopathology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Ember CR, Ember M. 2004. Encyclopedia of medical anthropology: health and illness in the world's cultures. Credo Reference. Kiefer CW. 2007.Doing health anthropology: research methods for community assessment and change. Springer. McElroy A, Townsend PK. 2009. Medical Anthropology in Ecological Perspective, 5th edition. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Ortner DJ, Putschar WGJ. 1981. Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Remains. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. Roberts C, Manchester K. 2007. The Archaeology of Disease, 3rd edition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Saracci R. 2010. Epidemiology: a very short introduction. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press. Weiss E. 2015. Paleopathology in perspective: bone health and disease through time. Rowman & Littlefield. White TD, Folkens PA. 2005. The Human Bone Manual. Boston: Elsevier Academic Press. Wiley AS, Allen JS. 2009. Medical Anthropology: A Biocultural Approach. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Applicable student group(s): Degree Breadth
Course Details:
MODULE 1: Anthropological Perspectives on Health

- Introduction
- Health, disease and illness
- Medical and biological anthropology perspectives on health
- Determinants of health

 

Evaluation:    Discussion (20%)
                      Quiz 1 (5%)


MODULE 2: Biocultural Perspectives on Human Health & & Ethics in Health Research

- Anthropological theoretical approaches to understanding human
  health
- Biocultural factors that affect human health

- Research ethics

Evaluation:    Quiz 2 (2%)


MODULE 3:  Biocultural Understanding of Health: Adaptation, Evolution
& Culture

- Adaptation
- Evolution
- Genetics and physiology
- Culture and human behaviour

 

Evaluation:    Quiz 3 (5%)


MODULE 4:  From Healthy to Sick: Categorizing and Measuring Disease

- Categories of disease
- Patterns of disease
- Disease contraction
- Disease susceptibility

 

Evaluation:    Quiz 4 (5%)


MODULE 5:  Accessing Information about Health and Disease in the Past

- Approaches to studying past health and disease
- Sources of information about health and disease in the past
- Methods used to document past health and disease
- Human skeletal anatomy
- How disease affects human tissue
- Osteological paradox

 

Evaluation:    Quiz 5 (5%)

                      Paleopathology Assignment Prep (5%)


MODULE 6:  Hominin Diet and Disease

- Factors that prompted the emergence of the first hominins
- Characteristics of the first hominins
- Dietary changes with the Australopithecines
- Diet and behaviour of the members of the genus Homo
- Evidence of health and disease in the fossil record

Evaluation:    Quiz 6 (5%)

                       Paleopathology Assignment Group Contract (5%)


MODULE 7:  Prehistoric Subsistence Transitions and Health

- Impact of lifestyle and activity on health
- Health issues faced by hunter-gatherers
- Health issues faced by agriculturalists

- Health issues faced by industrialized society

 

Evaluation:    Quiz 7 (5%)


MODULE 8:  Health in the Present - Research Approaches

- Epidemiological and medical anthropology perspectives
- Types of health and disease information
- Qualitative vs. quantitative approaches

Evaluation:    Paleopathology Group Assignment (20%)

                      Quiz 8 (5%)


MODULE 9:  Health in the Present - Infectious and Re-emerging diseases

- Categories of infectious disease
- Environmental and cultural influences on infectious disease
  susceptibility and transmission
- Infectious disease control measures

Evaluation:    Quiz 9 (5%)


MODULE 10: Health in the Present - Diet and Nutrition

- Relationships between diet and human biology
- The `thrifty-gene'
- Cultural dietary diversity
- Diet related health issues

Evaluation:   Quiz 10 (5%)

 



Sheridan Policies
It is recommended that students read the following policies in relation to course outlines:


Academic Integrity
Copyright
Intellectual Property
Respectful Behaviour
Accessible Learning
All Sheridan policies can be viewed on the Sheridan policy website.

Appropriate use of generative Artificial Intelligence tools: In alignment with Sheridan's Academic Integrity Policy, students should consult with their professors and/or refer to evaluation instructions regarding the appropriate use, or prohibition, of generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) tools for coursework. Turnitin AI detection software may be used by faculty members to screen assignment submissions or exams for unauthorized use of artificial intelligence. Students are encouraged to engage with generative AI in teaching and learning contexts thoughtfully. Please review the Guidelines for the Responsible Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence at Sheridan College.

Course Outline Changes: The information contained in this Course Outline including but not limited to faculty and program information and course description is subject to change without notice. Any changes to course curriculum and/or assessment shall adhere to approved Sheridan protocol. Nothing in this Course Outline should be viewed as a representation, offer and/or warranty. Students are responsible for reading the Important Notice and Disclaimer which applies to Programs and Courses.


[ Printable Version ]

Copyright © Sheridan College. All rights reserved.
